---
layout: page
title: Preface
permalink: /preface/
---

PREFACE

Why should I hesitate to express the pleasure I felt on learning that
the public, already deeply interested in the teachings of
Yoritomo-Tashi, desired to be made familiar with them in a new form?

This knowledge meant many interesting and pleasant hours of work in
prospect for me, recalling the time passed in an atmosphere of that
peace which gives birth to vibrations of healthful thoughts whose
radiance vitalizes the soul.

It was also with a zeal, intensified by memories of the little deserted
room in the provincial museum, where silence alone could lend rhythm to
meditation, that I turned over again and again the leaves of those
precious manuscripts, translating the opinions of him whose keen and
ornate psychology we have so often enjoyed together.

It was with the enthusiastic attention of the disciple that once more I
scanned the pages, where the broadest and most humane compassion allies
itself with those splendid virtues: energy, will and reason.

For altho Yoritomo glorifies the will and energy under all their
aspects, he knows also how to find, in his heart, that tenderness which
transforms these forces, occasionally somewhat brutal, into powers for
good, whose presence are always an indication of favorable results.

He knows how to clothe his teachings in fable and appealing legend, and
his exotic soul, so near and yet so far, reminds one of a flower, whose
familiar aspect is transmuted into rare perfume.

By him the sternest questions are stripped of their hostile aspects and
present themselves in the alluring form of the simplest allegories of
striking poetic intensity.

When reading his works, one recalls unconsciously the orations of the
ancient philosophers, delivered in those dazzling gardens, luxuriant in
sunlight and fragrant with flowers.

In this far-away past, one sees also the silhouette of a majestic
figure, whose school of philosophy became a religion, which interested
the world because it spoke both of love and goodness.

But in spite of this fact, the doctrines of Yoritomo are of an
imaginative type. His kingdom belongs to this world, and his theories
seek less the joys of the hereafter than of that tangible happiness
which is found in the realization of the manly virtues and in that
effort to create perfect harmony from which flows perfect peace.

He takes us by the hand, in order to lead us to the center of that Eden
of Knowledge where we have already discovered the art of persuasion, and
that art, most difficult of all to acquire\--the mastery of timidity.

Following him, we shall penetrate once more this Eden, that we may study
with Yoritomo the manner of acquiring this art\--somewhat unattractive
perhaps but essentially primordial\--called Common Sense.