---
layout: post
title: Personal Finance Ideas
categories: [personal finance, money]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

**Idea \#1: Spend Less Than You Earn!**

*Annual income twenty pounds, annual expenditure nineteen nineteen and six,*

*result happiness. Annual income twenty pounds, annual expenditure twenty*

*pounds ought and six, result misery.* Charles Dickens, *David Copperfield* In the end, this is the fundamental rule of personal finance: ***spend less than you earn***
<!--more-->
[\[7\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/08/23/personal-finance-boils-down-to-just-two-things/). Itʼs the one point that comes up time and time again in almost every personal [finance book you read \[8\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/11/14/52-books-52-weeks-10-fundamental-personal-finance-ideas/) or talk that you hear. Itʼs easy to see it when you look at each side of the coin. Letʼs say you earn \$30,000 a year and you spend \$31,000 a year. That extra \$1,000 has to be borrowed, often from sources like credit cards. The following year, in order to maintain your lifestyle, you still spend \$1,000 a year more than you make, plus you spend \$300 more than that just making the minimum payments on your debt, leaving you a total of \$2,200 in the hole (the \$1,000 extra you spent the first year plus the \$1,000 extra you spent the second year plus the \$300 extra you spent repaying that debt minus the \$100 you actually managed to pay off). The debt builds - after the third year, youʼre \$3,600 in debt. It keeps growing and growing and growing until that debt is eating up all of your income, leaving you in misery. On the other hand, letʼs say you only spend \$29,000 a year - only \$2,000 less in spending. That extra \$1,000 goes into your savings account and earns 3%. The next year, you drop another \$1,000 in the account and now you have \$2,030 in there. The next year, another \$1,000, bringing you to \$3,060.90. That money builds up and soon you have a house down payment or the seed money to start the small business of your dreams - or even something as simple as the ability to easily pay for a car repair without your heart skipping a beat. *The difference between these two stories is only \$2,000 a year*. There are two avenues to achieving this goal: spending less and earning more. By working on either (or both) of these areas, you can increase the gap between those two numbers - and that gap is [your ticket to freedom \[9\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/01/12/when-your-income-from-investments-covers-your-living-expenses-the-crossover-point). The harder you work on either spending less or earning more, the bigger that gap will become and the quicker that train to your dreams will arrive at the station. Letʼs look at each side of that coin.

<amp-img width="450" height="254" layout="intrinsic" src="/assets/images/000025.png"></amp-img>

**Idea \#2: Earn More!**

*It\'s better to hang out with people better than you. Pick out associates whose*

*behavior is better than yours and you\'ll drift in that direction.* Warren Buffett So how does one earn more? Many people will argue that there is no universal way for people to earn more money, and theyʼre right: some people are born entrepreneurs, others function much better in an office environment. Some people are endlessly creative, others are masters at completing long lists of tasks. Once you dig past that, though, there are some common things that anyone can do, regardless of their financial state, to earn more money.

***Get Started Now!***

The best way to get started is found in your own workplace.

<amp-img width="895" height="640" layout="intrinsic" src="/assets/images/000026.png"></amp-img>

**Go to work well-rested and presentable**. Never show up to work looking like you just rolled out of bed. Take a shower, wear clean clothes, use deodorant, brush your teeth, [and do your best to look presentable \[10\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2008/02/28/investing-in-yourself-personal-appearance-and-hygiene/). Also, get a good night of sleep before work so that you can be as mentally and physically fresh as possible. Every interaction you have in the workplace will reflect either positively or negatively upon you, and you can very easily increase the positive-ness of those interactions by just taking a half an hour to make yourself presentable.

**Minimize negative comments**. Every work environment provides ample opportunities for negativity, whether itʼs just workplace gossip or your manager is asking questions. While it might feel good to participate in the negativity of gossip, donʼt (feel free to listen, but donʼt jump in with the negativity). Even when supervisors are seeking comments on other workers, hold back Women workers in ordnance shops, Midval Steel and Ordnance Co., on the negativity and look for what Nicetown, Pa. Hand chipping with pneumatic hammers. 1918. Lt. Lubbe. Credit: National Archives and Records Administration positives you can find. Negativity in the workplace drags everyone down and positivity lifts everyone, so stick with the positive.

**Donʼt "backstab" anyone.**

Along those same lines, youʼll have many opportunities to "sell out" others in the workplace. Avoid it at all costs. If you have an opportunity to discuss other workers or particular situations, you might perceive that piling on those workers or those situations will benefit you - rarely is that actually true. Instead, look for the positives you can outline about anyone or anything.

**If you have downtime, find something useful to do.**

Many workplaces have times where there is simply downtime - youʼre waiting on new customers, youʼve finished your current project, and so on. That downtime is key in separating the people who get ahead from the people who get left behind. Find things to do with that time thatʼs useful. Clean up your workspace. Clean up the store. Work on a low-priority project. Improve your skills. There are always things that can be done - donʼt just sit or stand around to be told what to do.

<amp-img width="400" height="317" layout="intrinsic" src="/assets/images/000027.png"></amp-img>

**Do every task youʼre given as well as you can.**

When youʼre given a minor, menial task, itʼs often very tempting to do it with minimal effort just to get it done. Youʼre supposed to sweep the floor, so you do it mindlessly and do a mediocre job. Youʼre given something to type up, but you donʼt bother to check it for typos. Youʼre given a mundane system administration task, so you overlook a basic step. Instead of falling into that trap, try to give your complete focus to the task at hand and do it as best you can.

**Learn from (and emulate) the people who do their job well.**

In most workplaces, itʼs easy to identify the top workers. Theyʼre the ones that managers defer to and ask for advice. Theyʼre the ones who always seem to come through with the things that need to be done. As a result, they have job stability, plenty of options, and likely a very solid salary. Learn from these people. Ask them plenty of questions about how they get things done. Watch what they do, particularly with their downtime. In some situations, it might [even be appropriate to ask them to be your mentor \[11\].](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2008/09/30/how-to-find-and-utilize-a-mentor-no-matter-what-youre-doing/)

**Build positive relationships with**

**everyone in the workplace.**

You do nothing but gain from building a positive relationship with everyone in your workplace, from the highest level of management that you can easily interact with to the person who empties the trash cans. Be friendly to everyone. Ask how their day is going. Find some common interests and talk about them. The more people you develop positive relationships Secretaries, housewives, women from all over central Florida are getting into vocational schools to learn war work. Typical are these in the with (both up and down the hierarchy), Daytona Beach branch of the Volusia country vocational school. April 1942\. Credit: National Archives and Records Administration the better off youʼll be.

**Ignore poisonous people.**

Every workplace seems to have a poisonous person or two. I know Iʼve interacted with plenty of such people in my years - and in a few cases, theyʼve really reduced the quality of the work environment and made me more negative. If youʼre stuck with a poisonous person, just minimize all interaction with that person.

When you do have to interact, stick with the facts and get back to your own tasks. That person might spew some poison about you, but most workplaces have pretty clearly identified the poisonous people and take what they say with a grain of salt, so donʼt let their responses or backstabbing bother you. Get your work done and move on with life.

**Never use your sick leave as "extra vacation."**

In one environment where I worked, this problem was endemic. As soon as a person had enough sick leave built up to take even a single day off, that person called in "sick" like clockwork - with one exception. Want to guess who the one person was that received a raise and then, later, a promotion was? Itʼs fine to use your sick leave when youʼre actually ill, but consistent and reliable presence in the workplace is a huge benefit for your long-term career goals.

**Improve yourself in your spare time.**

The simplest way to do this is to work on getting [in better shape. Get some exercise \[12\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2008/02/26/investing-in-yourself-diet/)[and eat a healthy diet \[13\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2008/02/19/investing-in-yourself-exercise/). Doing this will improve both your energy and your appearance, things that are purely beneficial in any work environment. If you have a job that requires some specific skills, find ways to improve those in your spare time as well. Keep up to date on your specific area of knowledge. Learn what you would need to know to take the next step in your career.

**Step up to challenges when they present themselves.**

When a challenging situation comes up, donʼt shy away from it. Step up to the plate and give it your best shot. If you think it might be over your head, ask for help when you need it. If you show yourself able to handle challenging tasks, youʼll become a more valuable employee, and a more valuable employee gets more perks.

**Be a leader when itʼs needed.**

When difficult situations occur, every workplace benefits from having someone they can rely on as a leader. Be the person that speaks for the workers during a meeting. Be the person who helps people out when theyʼre going through a crisis. Eventually, youʼll find that people simply come to you by default - and that includes management.

**Own up to your own mistakes.**

If you mess up (and you inevitably will), admit to the mistake and do what you can to rectify it. Donʼt try to hide it. Donʼt try to pass the blame to others. [Apologize well - not facetiously \[14\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2009/04/16/the-art-of-the-apology/). Everyone makes mistakes. The winners *Everything <amp-img width="221" height="399" layout="intrinsic" src="/assets/images/000000.png"></amp-img> are the people who own up to those mistakes and then go the extra mile to fix the created problem.

**Stand up for yourself when you want a raise or promotion**. If you want a raise or a promotion, be clear about it. Ask your supervisor directly for what you want - and be able to make a good case for it. If you get a "no," ask what you need to do to put yourself in position for it and do just that. If you donʼt stand up for yourself, no one will.

**Get Educated**

This doesnʼt mean drop out and go back to school. It merely means to keep learning new things. If something [interests you, read a book about it \[15\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2008/02/18/investing-in-yourself-education-and-cultural-literacy/). Take evening classes to get certification in a certain area or get a mastersʼ degree. No matter what youʼre doing, thereʼs some way you can learn more and improve yourself.

**Develop More Income Streams**

 Always be on the lookout for ways to have money rolling into your pocket from a lot of different places [\[16\]. Maybe](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/09/19/multiple-income-streams-how-they-can-work-for-you/) youʼre a good writer and can sell a short story or an online ebook. Maybe youʼve got a little piece of land somewhere that you can lease to a farmer or a developer. Maybe you spend your free time managing a flower bed in the park - Power house mechanic working on a steam pump. By Lewis Hine, 1920. Credit: National Archives and Records why not put a little wooden freewill donation box out there Administration for people to drop a coin in? Maybe you have some extra cash laying around with which you can buy a long-term treasury note that will keep [issuing you a check every six months \[17\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/01/16/the-treasury-note-retirement-plan/). Having more income streams merely means that losing one of them (like your job) is less devastating in your life and it also means your overall income for now will go up.

**Start a Side Business**

[Instead of burning a few hours in front of the television each evening \[18\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/04/09/ten-financial-reasons-to-turn-off-your-television-and-ten-things-to-replace-it-with/), how about [investing at least part of that time into starting a side business \[19\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2009/03/05/some-thoughts-on-starting-a-side-business-in-a-down-economy/)? You can try starting a blog with a few ads on it, or maybe youʼre good with woodworking and can make deck furniture. Maybe youʼre good at baking bread and can take loaves to the farmerʼsmarket, or maybe you deeply enjoy gardening and can sell vegetables. There are lots of possibilities out there for starting a business that will supplement your current income [and perhaps eventually grow into your main income \[20\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2009/04/11/50-side-businesses-you-can-start-on-your-own/).

**Move Towards Your Passions**

Whenever the opportunity presents itself, gravitate towards the things that really excite [you, because passion is what will make you successful \[21\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2008/03/18/seven-steps-to-finding-what-youre-truly-passionate-about/). For me, my passion is writing, so Iʼve made an effort to gravitate towards it by working on The Simple Dollar in my spare time. For others, it could be anything - maybe itʼs leading a team, or perhaps itʼs writing beautiful computer code. Whatever really excites you and makes you want to do more and more and more and better and better and better, thatʼs what you need to [move towards at all times \[22\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2008/03/11/ten-ways-to-translate-your-passion-into-additional-income/).

***Donʼt Burn Bridges***

You never know when a relationship youʼve forged in your past might come in handy later on, even the ones you completely donʼt expect. Thus, even if you feel wronged in a situation or want "revenge" on some people - or even if you just feel an urge to spread negative gossip - resist it. As you get older, youʼll find yourself time and time again bumping into people that you forged relationships with earlier on - if you burned those bridges, youʼll find that eventually youʼll have burnt that very bridge that you need to cross to get ahead. My advice? Never spread a negative word about anyone, because it never helps.

**Keep in Touch**

When you do build a bridge with someone, donʼt let it get old and worn out - spend the time to keep in touch with that person. Shoot them an email or a phone call every once in a while just to see what theyʼre up to. When itʼs clear they need help and you can easily provide it, always provide it. I found the book *Never Eat Alone* by Keith Ferrazzi [\[23\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/05/13/review-never-eat-alone/) to be particularly powerful in this regard. Iʼm rather introverted, and itʼs often a challenge for me to initiate and then keep communication going with someone, and this book provided tons of tips on how (and why) to keep contact with people.

<amp-img width="450" height="254" layout="intrinsic" src="/assets/images/000028.png"></amp-img>

**Idea \#3: Live Frugal!**

*Industry, perseverance, and frugality make fortune yield.* Benjamin Franklin For a lot of people, frugality is a nine letter word for cheap. They think of people doing stuff like buying cartloads of generic products, using forty coupons in the checkout aisle, wearing patched clothing, driving a rusted-out old vehicle, and other such things that itʼs easy to look down your nose at. Hereʼs a secret, something that Iʼve witnessed several times in my own life and read about many more: those frugal people that you look down your nose at often have a mountain of cash in the bank (not always, of course, but more often than you think). Theyʼre not drowning in a mortgage, theyʼre not making payments on a five figure credit card debt. Theyʼre not working to death on the weekends or drowning an ulcer in Pepto-Bismol. Theyʼre living their life according to their own rules.

<amp-img width="250" height="279" layout="intrinsic" src="/assets/images/000029.png"></amp-img> The best part is that we can all apply some of those same rules in our own life. Hereʼs what you can do to start reducing that spending.

**Maximize Every Dollar**

Every time you spend money, you make a decision. You decide that whatever youʼre giving that dollar for is worth it, and thus you make the exchange. The real key to spending less is to raise that definition of what a dollar is worth. Here are 100 great tactics for reducing your spending and saving more money.
