---
layout: post
title: Sharing Nicely On Shareable Goods and the Emergence of Sharing as a Modality of Economic Production
chapter: 3
---

The world's fastest supercomputer and the second-largest commuter transportation system in the United States function on a resource-management model that is not well specified in contemporary economics. Both SETI@home, a distributed computing platform involving the computers of over four million volunteers, and carpooling, which accounts for roughly one-sixth of commuting trips in the United States, rely on social relations and an ethic of sharing, rather than on a price system, to mobilize and allocate resources. Yet they coexist with, and outperform, price-based and government-funded systems that offer substitutable functionality. Neither practice involves public goods, network goods, or any other currently defined category of economically "quirky" goods as either inputs or outputs. PCs and automobiles are privately owned, rival goods, with no obvious demand-side positive returns to scale when used for distributed computing or carpooling. 1 The sharing practices that have evolved around them are not limited to tightly knit communities of repeat players who know each other well and interact across many contexts. They represent instances when social sharing 2 is either utterly impersonal or occurs among loosely affiliated individuals who engage in social practices that involve contributions of the capacity of their private goods in patterns that combine to form large-scale and effective systems for provisioning goods, services, and resources. 

This chapter in its original form serves as the introduction to a longer essay that seeks to do two things. The first three parts of the full essay are dedicated to defining a particular class of physical goods as "shareable goods" that systematically have excess capacity and to combining comparative transaction costs and motivation analysis to suggest that this excess capacity may better be harnessed through sharing relations than through secondary markets. These first three parts extend the analysis I have performed elsewhere 

regarding sharing of creative labor, like free software and other peer production, 3 to the domain of sharing rival material resources in the production of both rival and nonrival goods and services. The characteristics I use to define shareable goods are sufficient to make social sharing and exchange of material goods feasible as a sustainable social practice. But these characteristics are neither absolutely necessary nor sufficient for sharing to occur. Instead, they define conditions under which, when goods with these characteristics are prevalent in the physical-capital base of an economy, it becomes feasible for social sharing and exchange to become more salient in the overall mix of relations of production in that economy. The fourth part of the full essay is then dedicated to explaining how my observation about shareable goods in the domain of physical goods meshes with the literature on social norms, social capital, and common property regimes, as well as with my own work on peer production. I suggest that social sharing and exchange is an underappreciated modality of economic production, alongside price-based and firmbased market production and state-based production, 4 whose salience in the economy is sensitive to technological conditions. The last part explores how the recognition of shareable goods and sharing as a modality of economic production can inform policy. 

Shareable goods are goods that are (1) technically "lumpy" and (2) of "midgrained" granularity. By "lumpy" I mean that they provision functionality in discrete packages rather than in a smooth flow. A PC is "lumpy" in that you cannot buy less than some threshold computation capacity, but once you have provisioned it, you have at a minimum a certain amount of computation, whether you need all of it or not. By "granularity" I seek to capture (1) technical characteristics of the functionality-producing goods, (2) the shape of demand for the functionality in a given society, and (3) the amount and distribution of wealth in that society. A particular alignment of these characteristics will make some goods or resources "midgrained," by which I mean that there will be relatively widespread private ownership of these goods and that these privately owned goods will systematically exhibit slack capacity relative to the demand of their owners. A steam engine is large grained and lumpy. An automobile or PC is midgrained in the United States, Europe, and Japan but large grained in Bangladesh. Reallocating the slack capacity of midgrained goods — say, excess computer cycles or car seats going from A to B — becomes the problem whose solution can be provided by secondary markets, sharing, or management. I offer reasons to think that sharing may have lower transaction costs, improve the information on which agents who own these resources act, and provide better motivation for clearing excess 

capacity. While economists might prefer to call these goods "indivisible" rather than "lumpy," that terminology is less intuitive to noneconomists, and, more importantly, it emphasizes a concern with how best to price capacity that is indivisible and coarsely correlated to demand, glossing over the way in which the granularity affects the pattern of distribution of investment in these goods in society. My own concern is how a particular subclass of indivisible goods — those that are midgrained as I define them here — creates a feasibility space for social sharing rather than requiring a particular model of second-best pricing. While indivisibilities do create challenges for efficient pricing, in my analysis they create conditions in which social relations may provide a more efficient transactional framework to provision and exchange those goods than would the price system. 

In particular, both markets and managerial hierarchies require crisp specification of behaviors and outcomes. Crispness is costly. It is not a characteristic of social relations, which rely on fuzzier definitions of actions required and performed, of inputs and outputs, and of obligations. Furthermore, where uncertainty is resistant to cost-effective reduction, the more textured (though less computable) information typical of social relations can provide better reasons for action than can the persistent (though futile) search for crisply computable courses of action represented by pricing or managerial commands. Moreover, social sharing can capture a cluster of social and psychological motivations that are not continuous with, and may even be crowded out by, the presence of money. Pooling large numbers of small-scale contributions to achieve effective functionality — where transaction costs would be high and per-contribution payments must be kept low — is likely to be achieved more efficiently through social sharing systems than through market-based systems. It is precisely this form of sharing — on a large scale, among weakly connected participants, in project-specific or even ad hoc contexts — that we are beginning to see more of on the Internet; that is my central focus. 

Social sharing and exchange is becoming a common modality of producing valuable desiderata at the very core of the most advanced economies — in information, culture, education, computation, and communications sectors. Free software, distributed computing, ad hoc mesh wireless networks, and other forms of peer production offer clear examples of such large-scale, measurably effective sharing practices. I suggest that the highly distributed capital structure 5 of contemporary communications and computation systems is largely responsible for the increased salience of social sharing as a modality of economic production in those environments. By lowering the capital costs 

required for effective individual action, these technologies have allowed various provisioning problems to be structured in forms amenable to decentralized production based on social relations, rather than through markets or hierarchies. 

My claim is not, of course, that we live in a unique moment of humanistic sharing. It is, rather, that our own moment in history suggests a more general observation: that the technological state of a society, particularly the extent to which individual agents can engage in efficacious production activities with material resources under their individual control, affects the opportunities for, and hence the comparative prevalence and salience of, social, market (both price based and managerial), and state production modalities. The capital cost of effective economic action in the industrial economy shunted sharing to its peripheries — to households in the advanced economies and to the global economic peripheries that have been the subject of the anthropology of gift or common property regime literatures. The emerging restructuring of capital investment in digital networks — in particular, the phenomenon of user-capitalized computation and communications capabilities— is at least partly reversing that effect. Technology does not determine the level of sharing. But it does set threshold constraints on the effective domain of sharing as a modality of economic production. Within the domain of the feasible, the actual level of sharing practices will be culturally driven and cross-culturally diverse. 

The loose category of "social sharing" that I employ here covers a broad range of social phenomena. Carpooling can largely, though not exclusively, be explained in terms of instrumental exchange. Distributed computing projects look like cases of mass altruism among strangers. What justifies bringing such diverse practices under one umbrella term is that they are instances of productive cooperation that are based neither on the price system nor on managerial commands. Given the focus of current policy debates on improving the institutional conditions for market-based production of various desiderata, even at the expense of substitutable social practices, it becomes important to recognize the presence, sustainability, and relative efficiency of even a loosely defined broad alternative. 

Once we come to accept the economic significance of this cluster of social practices, we will have to turn to mapping internal variations and understanding their workings and relationships to each other as economic phenomena. Even from the relatively limited review I offer here, it is clear that social production covers different forms of motivation and organization. There are instrumental and noninstrumental motivations. Instrumental motivations may, in turn, be material — the primary focus of the social norms, social capital, and common property regimes literatures — or socialrelational — that is, focused on the production of relations of power within a society, a focus that has been central to the literature on the gift. 6 The gift literature, however, has meshed the instrumental production of social relations with the noninstrumental, mystical, or religious nature of gift giving. This noninstrumental form of motivation — though from a very nonmystical perspective — has also been the focus of the psychological literature on motivation crowding out. Understanding how the motivational and organizational forms of this modality operate will be important whether one seeks to engage in institutional design that takes into consideration the presence of social production as a potential source of welfare, or whether one is concerned with building a business model that harnesses the power of social production — be it for profit, like IBM's relationship with the GNU/Linux development community, or nonprofit, like NASA's relationship with the contributors to SETI@home. For now, however, all we need is to recognize that a broad set of social practices can be sustainable and efficient substitutes for markets, firms, and bureaucracies. 

The policy implications of recognizing the relative importance of sharing-based solutions to economic problems are significant. As we manage the transition to a networked information economy, we face diverse questions regarding how best to regulate different areas of this economy: How should we regulate wireless communications systems? How should we regulate music distribution? Should we regulate the design of computers to assure that they are not used to access cultural products without authorization? Usually these policy debates, to the extent they are concerned with efficiency and welfare, assume that the role of policy is to optimize the institutional conditions of attaching prices to marginal actions so as to permit the price system to be the dominant modality of production. This may or may not be wise, but whether it is or is not can only be examined thoughtfully once we have a full picture of the alternatives. If we believe that there are only two alternatives — the price system and some form of hierarchy — we have a very different policy-choice space than if we believe that there is a third modality of production open to us, social production, that may under certain conditions be more efficient. 

Radio and communications technologies have reached a point where our policy focus is changing. The Federal Communications Commission is creating an institutional framework to facilitate markets in shareable goods — unlicensed wireless devices and systems— that coproduce wireless transport capacity. Originally, using such devices was prohibited in order to make the world safe for large-grained systems, like broadcast towers or cellular networks, that deliver wireless services on the basis of either the terms of a government license or markets in "spectrum." The musiccopyright debate around peer-to-peer file sharing can also be explained in terms of the change in the type of goods used in distribution, from large-scale capital goods to midgrained shareable goods. Understood in these terms, solving this problem by squelching peerto-peer sharing becomes implausible, both descriptively and prescriptively Yet current policy analysis largely disregards how institutional changes will affect existing or emerging practices of sharing that may compete with, or substitute for, market-based production. If indeed we live in an economic system made up of price-based, hierarchy-based, and sharing-based modalities of production, if it is true that optimizing our institutional system for price-based production undermines productivity in the sharing modality, and if it is true that our communications, computation, and information sectors are undergoing technological changes that improve the efficiency of social sharing, then we are making systematically mistaken policy choices not on the peripheries of our economies and societies but at their very engines. 

NOTES 

This chapter was first published as the introduction to Sharing Nicely: On Shareable Goods and the Emergence of Sharing as a Modality of Economic Production, Yale Law Journal 114 (2004): 273-358, available at http://www.benkler.org/SharingNicely.html (accessed July 20, 2010). This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution license. I owe thanks to Bruce Ackerman, Ian Ayres, Bob Ellickson, Dan Kahan, Al Klevorick, Michael Levine, Orly Lobel, Daniel Markovits, Richard McAdams, Robert Post, Judith Resnik, Carol Rose, Susan Rose-Ackerman, Jed Rubenfeld, Alan Schwartz, Henry Smith, and Jim Whitman, who read prior versions of this essay and provided helpful comments. 

1. Computers as communications devices do have demand-side returns to scale, or network externalities. But as processing units, the paramount value of personal computers is the intrinsic value of their computation speed and memory, not the network externalities they enable owners to capture. SETI@home and other distributed computing projects harness these intrinsic -value aspects of personal computers rather than their capacities as communication devices. 

2. "Sharing" is an uncommon usage in the economics literature, though it is common in some of the anthropology literature. I choose it because it is broader in its application than other, more common, but narrower terms for associated phenomena — most importantly, "reciprocity" or "gift." I hesitate to use "reciprocity" because of its focus on more or less directly responsive reciprocated reward and punishment as a mechanism to sustain cooperation in the teeth of the standard assumptions about collective action. See Dan M. Kahan, The Logic of Reciprocity: Trust, Collective Action, and Law (Yale Law Sch., Pub. 

Law Research Paper No. 31, and Yale Program for Studies in Law, Econ. & Pub. Policy, Research Paper No. 281, 2002), available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=36i4.oo. Given the presence of purely redistributive practices like tolerated theft and demand sharing in the anthropology literature, evidence of nonreciprocal prosocial behavior — see Bruno S. Frey & Stephan Meier, Pro-social Behavior, Reciprocity, or Both? (Inst, for Empirical Research in Econ., Univ. of Zurich, Working Paper No. 107, 2002) — and more generally our intuitive experiences of acts of humanity toward others whom we will never encounter again, I suspect that some forms of redistribution are nonreciprocal except in the broadest sense of the reciprocation of living in a humane society. Mutual aid and cooperation without the possibility of reciprocal exchange likely exists, the "Lion and the Mouse" fable notwithstanding. See, e.g., James Woodburn, "Sharing Is Not a Form of Exchange": An Analysis of Property-Sharing in Immediate-Return Hunter-Gatherer Societies, in Property Relations: Renewing the Anthropological Tradition 48 (C. M. Hann ed., Cambridge Univ. Press 1998). I hesitate to use the term "gift exchange" because the highly developed gift literature (see note 6), has focused very heavily on the production and reproduction of social relations through the exchange and circulation of things. As will soon become clear, I am concerned with the production of things and actions/services valued materially, through nonmarket mechanisms of social sharing. "Sharing," then, offers a less freighted name for evaluating mechanisms of social-relations-based economic production. 

3. Yochai Benkler, Coase's Penguin, or, Linux and the Nature of the Firm, 112 Yale L.J. 369 (2002). 

4. In this, my position tracks the tripartite mapping of the universe of organizational forms that resulted from the work on nonprofits in the early 1980s. See Henry B. Hansmann, The Role of Nonprofit Enterprise, 89 Yale L.J. 835 (1980); see also Burton A. Weisbrod, The Nonprofit Economy 1-15 (1988); Susan Rose-Ackerman, Introduction, in The Economics of Nonprofit Institutions: Studies in Structure and Policy 3, 3-17 (Susan Rose-Ackerman ed., 1986). Unlike the nonprofit literature, my focus is not within the boundaries of firms — whether for profit or nonprofit — but on sharing among individuals in informal associations more resembling markets in the price-based economy than firms. 

5. This is different from capital intensity. The activity may be capital intensive — like distributed computing — when you consider the total capital cost of the computers, network connections, and so on required for an effective unit of production, in comparison to the cost of labor involved. The capital is, however, highly distributed, which is the key characteristic that enables individual agency in the production processes. 

6. The anthropological literature on sharing and the gift has been vast, starting with Bronislaw Malinowski, Argonauts of the Western Pacific (1922), and Marcel Mauss, The Gift: Forms and Functions of Exchange in Archaic Societies (Ian Cunnison trans., Free Press 1954) (1925). A combination of a broad intellectual history and a major contemporary contribution to this line is Maurice Godelier, The Enigma of the Gift (Nora Scott trans., Univ. of Chi. Press 1999) (1996). See also James G. Carrier, Property and Social Relations in Melanesian Anthropology, in Property Relations, supra note 2, at 85, 85-97 (providing brief intellectual history of the literature); C. M. Hann, Introduction: The Embeddedness of Property, in Property Relations, supra note 2, at 1, 23-34 (same). As an alternative antithesis to the competition-of-all-against-all model of human society, an early manifestation of a focus on mutual aid and cooperation as a possible path for contemporary societies was Petr Kropotkin, Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution (Extending Horizons Books 1955) (1902). 
