---
layout: post
title: Everything You Ever Really Needed to Know About Personal Finance Tips 80 to 100
chapter: 6
categories: [personal finance, money]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

**80. Donʼt speed.**

Not only is it inefficient in terms of gasoline usage, it also can get you [pulled over and cost you a bundle \[83\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/04/23/the-economics-of-speeding-or-how-i-got-a-ticket-this-morning/). Itʼs highly cost-efficient to just drive the speed limit, keep that gas in the tank, and keep the cops off your tail.

**81. Read more.**

Reading is one of the cheapest - and most beneficial - hobbies around. Most towns have a library available to the public - just go there and check out some books that interest you. Then, spend some of your free time in a cozy place in your house, just reading away. Youʼll learn something new, improve your reading ability, enjoy yourself, and not have to Caught Reading. Photo by Jayel Aheram. spend a dime - and itʼs surprisingly [easy to get into the reading habit \[84\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2008/01/29/how-to-build-a-reading-hobby-or-any-inexpensive-hobby/).
<!--more-->
**82. Buy a smaller house.**

I currently live in a 2,000 square foot house with my wife and two kids. Frankly, itʼs just the right size for us - if anything, itʼs a little big. We often find ourselves in the same room in the house, just surrounded by empty space. You donʼt need a giant place to live. Instead, buy something more modest and youʼll find yourself with plenty of room - and still plenty of cash in your pocket.

**83. Drive a different route to work.**

This is an especially powerful tip if you find yourself "automatically" stopping for something on the way into work or the way home. Get rid of that constant drain by selecting a different route that doesnʼt go by the [temptation \[85\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/04/04/five-minute-finances-20-drive-a-different-route/), even if the new route is a bit longer. Youʼll still be time ahead (because youʼre not stopping) and youʼll definitely be money ahead.

**84. Always ask for fees to be waived.**

Any time you sign up for a service of any kind and there are sign-up fees, ask for them to be waived. Sometimes (but not always), they will be - and you save money just by being forthright about not wanting to pay excessive fees. I did this with my last cell phone sign-up and got part of my fees waived, cutting down significantly on the bill.

**85. Donʼt overspend on hygiene products.**

For most people, inexpensive hygiene [products do the trick \[86\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/11/05/nine-ways-to-maximize-your-personal-hygiene-dollars/) - for example, I just buy whichever toothpaste is the cheapest, and the same goes with deodorant and the like. The key is to use this stuff regularly and consistently - bathe daily, keep yourself clean, and youʼll be just fine. No need to buy a \$40 facial scrub if you actually scrub your face properly.

**86. Eat less meat.**

For the nutritional value, meat is very expensive, especially as compared to vegetables and fruits. Simply change around your regular meal proportions to include more fruits and vegetables and less meats - eat a smaller steak and a bigger helping of green beans, for example. Not only is this a healthier way to eat (saving on health costs), itʼs also less expensive.

**87. Use a brutally effective coupon strategy.**

Hereʼs the trick: wait a month before [using the coupons \[87\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2008/01/18/the-one-month-coupon-strategy-a-really-clever-way-to-make-coupons-worthwhile/). Save your coupon flyer out of your Sunday paper for a month, then bust it out and start cutting anything that might be of interest. For a bonus kicker, use the coupons in comparison with your grocery store flyer that week to find out ways you can use a coupon to reduce the cost of an item already on sale - you can wind up paying pennies for some things and, on occasion, actually get food for free (Iʼve came home with a ton of free yogurt containers before, for example).

**88. Air seal your home.**

Most homes have some air leaks that make the job of keeping it cool in summer and warm in winter that much harder - and that much more costly for you. Spend an afternoon air sealing your home - the Department of Energy has a great [free guide on basic airsealing \[88\]](http://www.eere.energy.gov/consumer/your_home/insulation_airsealing/index.cfm/mytopic=11260).

**89. Make your own beer or wine.**

If you enjoy an occasional drink, this is a great way [to enjoy some of the beverages that you love at a surprisingly cheap price \[89\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2009/02/27/a-walkthrough-and-cost-breakdown-of-brewing-your-own-beer/). You can easily make five gallons of beer or wine at once and it doesnʼt take that long, either, once you have the basic ingredients. Even better, itʼs a great activity to do with friends -

<amp-img width="180" height="240" layout="intrinsic" src="/assets/images/000017.png"></amp-img> you buy the equipment, they bring the juice and you both get a few bottles of delicious homemade wine out of the deal. A nice entertainment, plus some free beverages - thatʼs a great frugal deal.

**90. Make sure all your electrical devices are on a surge protector.**

This is especially true of your entertainment center and your computer equipment. A power surge can damage these electronics very easily, so spend the money for a basic surge protector and keep your equipment plugged into such a device.

**91. Get on an automatic debt repayment plan for any student loans you have.**

Many student loans offer a rate reduction if you sign up for their automatic debt repayment plan. This way, not only do you save a few bucks a month, you donʼt have to go to the effort of actually paying the bill. Our automatic plan saved us about \$60 a year.

**92. Cut down on your vacation spending.**

Instead of going on a big, extravagant trip, pack up the car and see some of America some years for vacation. One of the best vacations Iʼve ever taken was when my son was an infant - we just packed up the car and drove around Minnesota, eventually camping for a few days along the north shore of Lake Superior. For a week long relaxing vacation, it was incredibly cheap and quite memorable, too.

**93. Cancel the cable or satellite channels you donʼt watch.**

Many people with cable services often are paying for a premium package but rarely watch those extra channels. For the longest time, my wife and I were subscribed to HBO, Starz, and Cinemax, yet we would only tune in once a month at best. We argued that it was worth it because we could watch a movie or a great drama whenever we wanted, but it would have been far cheaper just to rent a movie. Get rid of the excess channels and put that cash back in [your pocket \[90\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/03/26/five-minute-finances-16-cancel-the-channels-you-dont-watch/).

**94. Exercise more.**

Go for a walk or a jog each evening, and practice stretching and some light muscle exercise at home. These exercises can be done at home for very little, meaning youʼve got an activity without a lot of cost, and the health benefits are enormous. Just set aside some time each day to get some exercise, and your body and wallet will thank you.

**95. Utilize online bill pay with your bank.**

This serves two purposes. First, it keeps you in much closer contact with your money, as you can keep a very close eye on your balance and be in much less danger of overdrafting. Second, it saves you money on stamps and paper checks by allowing you to just fill in an online form, click submit, and have your bill paid. Try it out - and take advantage of it if youʼre not already.

**96. Buy staples in bulk**. We buy items we use a lot of in bulk, particularly items that donʼt perish - trash bags, laundry detergent, diapers, and so on are purchased in the largest amounts possible. This cuts down on their cost per usage by quite a bit and, over the long haul, begins to add up to some serious money. Even better, we donʼt have to shop for these items very often, saving time and a fraction of the cost of a trip to the grocery store.

**97. Connect your entertainment center and/or computer setup to a true smart power strip.**

A device like the SmartStrip LCG4 basically cuts power to all devices on the strip depending on the status of the first item on the strip. So, if you have your workstation hooked up to this, every time you power down your workstation, your monitor powers down, your printer powers down, your scanner powers down, and so on. You can do the same thing with your entertainment console - when you turn off the television, the cable/satellite box also goes off, as does the video game console, the VCR, the DVD player, and so on. This can save you a lot of electricity and significantly trim your power bill.

**98. Donʼt beat yourself up when you make a mistake.**

Even if you make ten good choices, itʼs easy to beat yourself up and feel like a failure over one bad choice. If you make a big mistake and realize it, think about why you realized it now instead of then, and try to apply that later on. The memory of that mistake can end up being very valuable, indeed.

**99. Always keep looking ahead**. Donʼt let the mistakes of your past drag you down into more mistakes. Look ahead to the future. The choices you make now wonʼt affect the past - but they definitely will affect the future. Think back, and remember how the bad choices you made earlier are costing you now, and constantly remember to not make those mistakes now so that they donʼt cost your future self.

**100. Never give up.**

Whenever the struggle against debt feels like itʼs too much, go read a personal finance blog and remember that there are a lot of people out there fighting the same fight. Read around through the archives and learn some new things - and perhaps get inspired to keep going, no matter what.

**Break Your Bad Habits**

Most people have some sort of routine in their day where they buy a morning latte or a bagel, or they drink six cans of soda, or they eat out at the same place each day for lunch. What these routines add up to is a lot of money. Spending \$5 every day in a workweek adds up to \$1,300 over a year - thatʼs a mortgage payment for a lot of people. Spend some time looking at the stuff you do every day, especially the ones that require you to spend money, and ask yourself if theyʼre really necessary or could be replaced.

***Donʼt Make Yourself Miserable!***

Most of the time, when you cut a bit of spending from your life, youʼll find that you never miss it. However, there are times when you find yourself really regretting it. If thatʼs the case, then itʼs probably a worthwhile expense for you. Saving money doesnʼt have to equate to misery, it just means that you cut down on the unnecessary.

***Donʼt Forget the Big Picture***

That, of course, doesnʼt mean that you should justify every purchase with a basic "I want it and I have money in my account." That shouldnʼt ever be enough to motivate a [purchase. I find that using a visual reminder in my wallet \[91\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/09/12/the-one-hour-project-create-a-visual-debt-reminder/) of what Iʼm financially working towards does a great job of keeping my mind on the big picture and helping me filter out whatʼs really needed and whatʼs just a fleeting desire.

<amp-img width="450" height="254" layout="intrinsic" src="/assets/images/000018.png"></amp-img>

**Idea \#4: Manage Your Money!**

*Only when the tide goes out do you discover who\'s been swimming naked.* Warren Buffett Whenever you increase your income or decrease your spending, youʼll find yourself with more cash at the end of the month. That cash is your ticket to financial freedom, and the more you can get each month, the better off you are. The trick, though, is to not spend it, but to do things that will build a stable future for you. Hereʼs the game plan.

***Pay Off All High Interest Debt***

Anything with an interest rate over 9% needs to go as soon as possible. Use the extra money to make double or triple payments on these debts, focusing first on the one with the highest interest rate. When that oneʼs gone, keep going with each successively lower interest rate debt. Hereʼs a detailed program for doing just taht.

**Getting Started - What You Need**

To get the ball rolling, youʼre going to need a few items.

<amp-img width="240" height="180" layout="intrinsic" src="/assets/images/000019.png"></amp-img>

*A few sheets of paper and a pen* Even though you likely spend quite a bit of time at the computer, this is still a good exercise to do with a few sheets of paper and a pen. Doing this little task by hand adds to the concreteness and importance of the exercise - and thereʼs really no math to do by hand here, either, so you donʼt have to worry about needing calculation tools. DEBT FREE AT AGE 28!! Photo by lemonjenny

*The latest statement for every single debt you have* Youʼll also need the latest statement on every single debt you have: your mortgage, your auto loans, student loans youʼre responsible for, any other outstanding consumer loans, credit card statements, and so on. Everything. Make sure that on this statement you can identify the annual interest rate (APR or APY, itʼs not important to distinguish between the two for the purpose of this exercise).

*Making the first list* The first thing you should do is make a list with four columns consisting of the name of each debt you owe, the amount you still owe on that debt, the monthly payment for that debt, and, most importantly, the current interest rate on that debt. You should be able to get all of this information easily from the statements. The goal here is to get all of that information into one place.

**Which Debts Take Priority?**

Now that you have the list, you can put the statements off to the side - everything you need is now on this one sheet of paper.

*Order all of the debts by their current interest rate.* Now, go through that list and number the debts based on their interest rate. Give the highest interest a big number 1 off to the left, the next highest a big 2, and so on. Donʼt worry about which debt has the biggest balance - that doesnʼt actually matter when figuring out which debt is the most important one to pay off. *Look for ways to reduce the rates, focusing most strongly on the highest current one.* Now that youʼve ordered the debts, go to the debt marked with a 1. Is there any way you can reduce that interest rate? If itʼs a credit card debt, you could call the credit card [company and ask for a rate reduction \[92\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2009/03/09/a-step-by-step-guide-to-getting-your-credit-card-interest-rates-reduced/), or you could transfer the balance to another card for a lower rate. You might also be able to pay it off with a home equity line of credit or with a personal loan from your credit union. Maybe you can consolidate your student loans at a very low rate. The key is to lower that interest rate. Go through every one of your debts from highest to lowest interest rate and do your best to get each rate nice and low. Obviously, there are some rates youʼre likely to be unable to easily change, like your mortgage rate, but see what you can do about most of the rest of them.

*When youʼve reduced rates, make a new list reflecting the changes.* As you get each rate lowered, update your list - cross off the old rates and write in the new ones, and likely cross off a few lines entirely and add new ones (if you consolidate or do balance transfers). If you wind up with two different interest rates on the same balance - after a balance transfer, for example - write down the interest rate that youʼd be paying off first with any extra payments and ignore the other rate. Once youʼve lowered all the rates as much as possible, rewrite the whole list so itʼs clear, except *order them directly by their current interest rate with the highest rate on* *top.* This is your debt repayment plan - it will save you a lot of money if you stick with it.

*What about debts that are set to adjust in the future?* One aspect that often confuses people is how to handle debts that are set to adjust in the future. I generally ignore these adjustments and apply one simple rule of thumb: itʼs always best to be in the best possible situation one month from now because the future is unclear. You may end up consolidating those debts, or maybe a windfall will come suddenly. Because of that uncertainty, look at the short term when repaying your debts and ignore possible future adjustments - itʼll make the planning easier and guide you down a path that, no matter what, is at the very least close to the best possible plan and often is the best possible plan. Yes, Iʼm aware that situations can be constructed where itʼs arguably better to worry about the adjustments early, but given the uncertainty of what may come and also the high level of confusion one adds to the discussion in order to shave off a few extra

<amp-img width="240" height="180" layout="intrinsic" src="/assets/images/000020.png"></amp-img> dollars, itʼs not worth the speculation. Build a plan - one thatʼs simple, makes sense, and is either optimal or very close to it - and stick with it, and youʼll be just fine.

**How Do I Use The Plan?**

*Direct all of your extra payments*

*towards the top debt on the list*. Each month, make minimum payments on all of the debts on the list except for Credit cards. Photo by TheTruthAbout\.... the top one. With that top debt, throw everything you can at it. Make a double payment or a triple payment or more. This is a [great time to use the snowflaking strategy \[93\]](http://www.paidtwice.com/2007/10/12/snowflaking-a-primer/) - whenever you come into a few extra dollars during the month, due to living cheap or a little unexpected windfall, immediately apply that cash to the top debt on your list.

*When a debt vanishes, cross it off and feel good about it!* Over time, you should be eating away very quickly at that top debt, and (hopefully) before long youʼll be able to eliminate it. Cross it off the list, celebrate a little, then start hammering away at the new top dog on your list.

**When Do I Need To Update The Plan?**

*Update the list when you acquire a new debt*. Whenever you get a new debt, itʼs going to need to find a place on your list. Stick it in there wherever it belongs based on the interest rate.

*Update the list when one of your debts adjusts to a new rate.* Whenever a debt of yours adjusts in interest rate, cross it off the list, then add it back in just like a new debt where it belongs based on the new interest rate. After you do this a few times, itʼs useful to rewrite the list so that everything remains clear on it, but itʼs fun to hold onto the old one (with some crossed-out debts) to remember where you came from.

***Build an Emergency Fund***

An emergency fund is an amount of money you keep in a savings account thatʼs intended to be used in the event of a major crisis, such as a job loss, a medical emergency, major car damage, and so on [\[94\]. It](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/01/03/emergency-funds-how-and-why-you-should-get-started-right-now/)ʼs a good idea to measure your emergency fund in terms of monthsʼ worth of living expenses - you should have a month and a half worth of living expenses for each person you claim as a dependent. So, for me in a house with two children and my wife, I have a six month emergency fund. For many, a *six month emergency fund* seems like an impossible goal. So, for now, put that thought aside - itʼs a very long term goal. Focus instead on putting away a small [amount each week \[95\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2009/04/07/is-suze-right-do-emergency-funds-now-trump-debt-repayment/). Ask your bank to transfer \$20 a week from your checking account to your savings account - and just forget about it until a major crisis hits. Having that cash will make all the difference - itʼll keep stress out of your life and make the crisis easy to manage without falling into debt.

**Max Out Retirement**

By this, I mean you should go to one of those retirement meetings at work, ask exactly how much you should be putting away to ensure that your living expenses are well-covered in retirement, and put that much away. This varies a lot depending on how much you have in right now, how much your employer matches, and so on, so you should talk to your retirement planner at work about the specifics. Youʼll hear a huge variety of advice on how to save for retirement. Most of it is contradictory. In truth, **very little of it matters**

as long as you follow a few key principles. You should be saving 10% of your income at the bare minimum. You should *not* have more than 5% of your retirement in the stock of any one company. If your company doesnʼt have a retirement plan, open a Roth IRA on your own with a reputable company like Vanguard. If your company offers any matching on your retirement, contribute enough so that you can get all of it. If you donʼt know what youʼre doing, put your money in a "target retirement" fund so that it gradually becomes less risky (read: less stock-heavy) as you approach retirement. If you actually *do* those things, youʼre already ahead of the game.

<amp-img width="240" height="183" layout="intrinsic" src="/assets/images/000021.png"></amp-img>

***What About College Savings?***

[College savings are next. If you have kids, set up a 529 college savings plan \[96\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2009/04/23/personal-finance-101-what-is-a-529/) for them and start automatically putting a certain amount into this account each month. There are a lot of different 529 plans available to you, but donʼt get stressed out by the [details - pick a good one \[97\]](http://articles.moneycentral.msn.com/CollegeAndFamily/SavingForCollege/The5BestCollegeSavingsPlans.aspx) and start saving *now* instead of hunting for the "perfect" one and wasting valuable investing time. The plan I use for my own children is College Savings Iowa, which is managed by Vanguard.

**Pay Off All Debts**

If all of these are covered and you still have cash left over (which you will, given some time), the next step is to pay off all of your debts. Get rid of your car loans, your student loans, and your mortgage using the debt reduction method described in the previous section.

***Invest!***

You might also want to start investing at this point. My recommendation is to buy low-cost broad-based index funds because they donʼt have many fees and grow very nicely over long [periods of time \[98\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/09/24/why-does-everyone-preach-about-index-funds-what-they-are-and-why-theyre-good-from-the-very-beginning/). Donʼt invest in individual stocks unless youʼre quite content to lose the money (i.e., gambling) or you want to invest many, many hours in research - something Save Money! Photo by voobie. few people want to do. I personally invest with Vanguard directly through vanguard.com - their fees are miniscule, they offer a huge array of index funds, and their customer service is stellar.

<amp-img width="450" height="254" layout="intrinsic" src="/assets/images/000022.png"></amp-img>

**Idea \#5: Control Your Own Destiny!**

*Freedom is not merely the opportunity to do as one pleases; neither is it*

*merely the opportunity to choose between set alternatives. Freedom is, first of*

*all, the chance to formulate the available choices, to argue over them \-- and*

*then, the opportunity to choose.* C. Wright Mills Most people see the goal of all of this as being rich. Thatʼs why you see so many books about millionaires on bookstore shelves - being a millionaire is something many of us aspire to, right? Hereʼs the secret: **itʼs not about being rich.**

Having a big net worth is just an indicator of what this whole process is really about.

**Itʼs all about freedom**. Freedom from debt. Freedom from supervisors telling us what to do. Freedom to spend the time to do things right. Freedom to try out new things and follow our interests. Freedom to sleep until eleven one day, then stay up until two in the morning working on what weʼre passionate about.

Thatʼs what most people really want - I know thatʼs certainly what I want. Having a big bank account just means that Iʼm not beholden to others. I can follow my passions and dreams wherever they take me. If my job is not satisfying to me, Iʼm no longer tied to that paycheck - I can just get up and walk away. I can do whatever makes me happy and avoid most of what makes me sad, without regrets or worries. It might be a bit unpleasant to substitute a Starbucks latte for a homemade cup of joe, but compared to that, how can little things possibly compare? Itʼs a lot of hard work to climb that mountain, but the air up there is the sweetest thing that there is.

**Do You Want To Know More?**

If you were excited by the information in this document, there are a lot of sources out there to find out more.

**The Simple Dollar**

 I update this site twice daily with articles that discuss the positive side of personal finance discussed in this document. I often try to relate the specific points to the real experience of my own life, translating what Iʼm going through into real advice you can use in your own life. The comments by readers are always lively - why not jump in and join the discussion?

**Personal Finance Books**

Here are twelve great personal finance books. Iʼve written extensive reviews of all of them - follow the footnote links to read my reviews.

*Your Money or Your Life* - Joe Dominguez and V[icki Robin (living; my favorite) \[99\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2006/12/16/review-your-money-or-your-life/)

*What Color Is Your Parachute?* [- Richard Nelson Bolles (careers) \[100\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/03/10/review-what-color-is-your-parachute/)

*The Bogleheadsʼ Guide to Investing* - Larimore, Lindauer[, and LeBoeuf (investing) \[101\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/03/17/review-the-bogleheads-guide-to-investing/)

*The Complete Tightwad Gazette* - [Amy Dacyczyn (frugality) \[102\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/07/27/review-the-complete-tightwad-gazette/)

*The Total Money Makeover* - Dave Ramsey (debt reduction) [\[103\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2006/12/09/review-the-total-money-makeover/)

*Born to Buy* [- Juliet Schor (parenting) \[104\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/11/02/review-born-to-buy/)

*It Pays to Talk* - Charles Schwab and Carrie Schwab-Pomerantz (communication) [\[105\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/07/06/review-it-pays-to-talk/)

*Smart and Simple Financial Strategies for Busy People*[- Jane Bryant Quinn \[106\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/10/05/review-smart-and-simple-financial-strategies-for-busy-people/)

*The Money Trap*[- Ron Gallen (mental blocks) \[107\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/12/07/review-the-money-trap/)

*The Difference* - Jean Chatzky (lifestyles) [\[108\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2009/04/05/review-the-difference/)

*Youʼre So Money* - Farnoosh T[orabi (young females) \[109\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2008/06/06/review-youre-so-money/)

*I Will Teach You To Be Rich* - Ramit Sethi (young professionals) [\[110\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2009/03/22/review-i-will-teach-you-to-be-rich/)

***Personal Finance, Personal Development, and Career Blogs***

I find that reading a wide variety of personal finance and personal growth ideas and opinions helps me to keep my own money in line. Here are twenty five essential reads.

**Ask MetaFilter**

<http://ask.metafilter.com> Ask MetaFilter is an interesting community blog of sorts. Hereʼs how it works: members pay a small fee to join, then theyʼre allowed to ask questions that are on their mind. The questions are all over the place, ranging from whether a person should move from Boston to Colorado to things like how budget reconciliation in the Senate works. The diversity of questions - and the wide range of responses, many of them well thought out \- makes Ask MetaFilter a compelling read.

**Bargaineering**

<http://www.bargaineering.com/articles/> Bargaineering (formerly Blueprint for Financial Prosperity) is probably my favorite personal finance blog for interesting ideas. Jim Wang, the author of the site, is quite good at generating compelling core ideas, which usually gets my mind moving. Quite often, Iʼll see an intriguing idea on Jimʼs site, stew on it for a while, try it out, look at how it works in my own life, and find myself eventually telling a story that goes off in some completely different direction.

**ChristianPF**

<http://www.christianpf.com>/ ChristianPF has a distinct take on personal finance: that the themes of Christianity and the themes of money management have quite a bit of overlap. Because the site focuses so heavily on that overlap - and because the author is a solid writer who occasionally throws out a few amazing gems - ChristianPF consistently offers insights that leave me thinking.

**Clever Dude**

<http://www.cleverdude.com>/ Clever Dude keeps me coming back because of the tone and the sense of humor underlying most of the posts. The site does a great job of putting just the right touch of humor on personal finance and frugality issues, often with the humor sneaking up on you and just brushing you when you least expect it. Itʼs just the right amount - enough to make the articles enjoyable to read, without going too far and making it all into a farce.

**Consumerism Commentary**

[http://www.consumerismcommentary.com/](http://www.consumerismcommentary.com) Flexo, the writer at Consumerism Commentary, has the knack of a good essayist. He can turn a simple, seemingly unrelated event or idea into an interesting personal finance take.

**Consumerist**

<http://consumerist.com>/ Consumerist is a blog run by Consumers Union, the folks behind Consumer Reports. It focuses directly on consumer issues, which means that it often calls out poor customer service from companies, faulty products, and so forth, mixed in with some great advice on saving money and making good buying choices. This is what I call a "flood" blog, meaning there are a lot of posts each day - I usually find myself just leafing through the piles of posts for the handful that really apply to me.

**Deal Seeking Mom**

<http://www.dealseekingmom.com>/ Deal Seeking Mom mostly just provides a lot of great coupons and freebies - the site does a great job of filtering out many of the less-useful items and just provides some of the cream of the crop - and occasionally drops a great article on specific money-saving tactics in the middle there.

**Dumb Little Man**

<http://www.dumblittleman.com>/ I keep coming back to Dumb Little Man for the variety. The site posts articles on a wide variety of topics - productivity, personal development, money management, careers, and so on. The author usually gets right to the point, outlining a handful of good suggestions on the topic. For me, it usually serves as a great starting point for ways to improve myself, whether in terms of money or career or even my day-to-day life.

**Freelance Switch**

<http://www.freelanceswitch.com>/ Freelance Switch focuses very specifically on the money and career issues that face people who are freelancers - of which, to an extent, I would include myself as a member. Because of that tight focus, Freelance Switch can toss out many of the extraneous details and really hone in on factors that matter specifically to freelancers.

**Free Money Finance**

<http://www.freemoneyfinance.com>/ Free Money Finance succeeds for me because the author is very, very effective at combing through the mainstream media, finding the articles on personal money management that are really compelling, and commenting on them in a relatable fashion. The (slight) majority of the posts at FMF follow that general format and, for me, those are the ones that keep me coming back for more.

**Frugal Dad**

Frugal Dad. The name alone tells you exactly what youʼre going to get: frugality tips and personal finance thoughts related to kids. Two topics that, unsurprisingly, appeal to me quite a bit. Another factor that works in Frugal Dadʼs favor is that the site, over time, tells the story of his life - a meshing of good advice and memoir that I find appealing.

**Get Rich Slowly**

<http://www.getrichslowly.org/blog/> Point blank, this is the best personal finance blog out there (besides The Simple Dollar, of course). JD and I have similar ideas so often that Iʼll sometimes check Get Rich Slowly before I post a new article just to make sure that JD hasnʼt randomly came up with a similar idea.

**I Will Teach You To Be Rich**

<http://www.iwillteachyoutoberich.com>/ I read I Will Teach You To Be Rich for two reasons. First, Ramitʼs focus is largely on entrepreneurship - itʼs fairly obvious that his audience is the Silicon Valley startup crowd. Second, his tone is pure entertainment - a pastiche of self-assurance and compelling advice that makes most of the articles there quite worth reading.

**Lifehacker**

<http://lifehacker.com>/ Lifehacker is a very frequently updated site (ten or more times a day) focusing on productivity technology issues, but occasionally brushing on personal finance, personal growth, and other areas. I almost always find a gem or two by browsing through Lifehacker - a useful piece of software, a good piece of advice, or something wholly unexpected.

**Money Saving Mom**

<http://www.moneysavingmom.com>/ Money Saving Mom is something like a hybrid between Frugal Dad and Deal Seeking Mom - itʼs a real medley of frugality tips, solid coupons (Iʼve used more coupons from MSM than from pretty much any other site Iʼve visited), and excellent anecdotes about parenting with frugality in mind.

**Pick the Brain**

<http://www.pickthebrain.com/blog> Pick the Brain is an excellent wide-ranging self-improvement blog, offering up tons of interesting articles on motivation, productivity, money management, and other aspects of self-improvement. The variety of ideas is what keeps me coming back - itʼs infrequently updated, but when I do see an update, itʼs usually full of solid ideas.

**Productivity501**

<http://www.productivity501.com>/ Productivity501 focuses squarely on how to be more productive with your time - and time is money, after all. Mark does a consistently great job of digging through ordinary tasks and finding ways to reduce our time investment on those tasks, resulting in more time to spend on other things of greater personal value (like spending time with my kids, for example).

**Queercents**

<http://www.queercents.com>/ Queercents is actually a collective blog, including writings from a large number of writers that are all members of the LGBT community. As with many group blogs, the presence of many writers creates a great diversity of opinion and perspectives - and often you find a writer or two that you really click with (I like Nina, for example) while being exposed to a lot of ideas and angles that you would have never considered before.

**Red Tape Chronicles**

 <http://redtape.msnbc.com>/ Red Tape Chronicles (from MSNBC) focuses on consumer issues - mostly, how to deal with customer service headaches, identity theft, and other painful elements of modern financial life. Bob Sullivan provides great fact-based coverage of consumer fraud, writing really strong material that often leads me to investigating similar experiences in my own life.

**Smart Spending**

<http://blogs.moneycentral.msn.com/SmartSpending/> Smart Spending is something of a "meta-blog" of personal finance blogs. Karen Datko and Donna Freedman do a great job of scouring a wide range of personal finance blogs, finding a wide variety of commentary on personal finance issues while adding their own unique views. Smart Spending is a great resource for seeing what lots of different voices are saying on personal finance topics.

**The Digerati Life**

<http://www.thedigeratilife.com/blog/> I often look at The Digerati Life as something of an urban parallel to The Simple Dollar. The author lives in the Bay Area and often has a more urban perspective than I do, but we regularly come to the same conclusions. What keeps me coming back? A warm tone and a lot of excellent advice.

**The Wallet**

<http://blogs.wsj.com/wallet/> The Wallet is a personal finance blog from the Wall Street Journal. It can be dry at times, but if you want a flood of thought-provoking reading on personal finance, this is a great source. Itʼs a mix of link collections to interesting articles from all over and short pieces from WSJ staff writers, all adding together to create a compelling mix of money material.

**Unclutterer**

<http://unclutterer.com>/ Unclutterer is a fascinating blog with a very specific topic: reducing clutter. In Erinʼs eyes, clutter stands in the way of personal productivity, personal happiness, and good personal finance, too. Her soft, witty tone and her consistently thoughtful ideas on reducing the clutter in oneʼs life keep me constantly coming back for more.

**Wise Bread**

<http://www.wisebread.com>/ Wise Bread is a group blog that looks at a huge array of personal finance issues, providing a wide range of voices and insights on money matters. The wide variety of voices (in particular, the always-excellent Philip Brewer) and wide variety of issues make this one a great blog for getting your juices flowing when it comes to money management.

**Zen Habits**

<http://zenhabits.net>/ Last but not least is Zen Habits, a site focused on simplicity in life, money, work, and love. Leoʼs goal with Zen Habits is pretty clear - if you reduce the complexities in your life, you have much more life to enjoy, a philosophy I wholeheartedly agree with. Leoʼs posts vary widely, but they all strike the common theme of finding a simpler way in life.

**The Final Thought You can do this.**

Two years ago, I was almost bankrupt and in deep despair [\[109\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2006/10/31/the-road-to-financial-armageddon-1-the-earliest-mistakes/) because I didnʼt believe this stuff, either. It took a lot of learning and a lot of honest soul-searching, but I began to realize what was really important and I turned the ship around. Trust me: you can do it, too.
