---
layout: post
title: Everything You Ever Really Needed to Know About Personal Finance Tips 30 to 60
chapter: 4
categories: [personal finance, money]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

**30. Talk to your loved ones about what your dreams are.**

This seems like an odd way to save money, but think about it. If you spend time with the people you love the most and come to some consensus about your dreams, it becomes easy for you all to plan for it. If youʼre all planning and working together towards this dream, it becomes easier to stay focused on it and reach it. Set a big, audacious goal together and encourage each other to be financially fit - soon, youʼll find youʼre doing it naturally and your dreams are coming closer than ever.

**31. Do a "maintenance run" on your appliances.**

Check them to make sure there isnʼt any dust clogging them and that theyʼre fairly clean. Look behind the appliances, and use your vacuum to gently clear away dust. Check all of the vents, especially on refrigerators, dryers, and heating and cooling units. The less dust you have blocking the mechanics of these devices, the more efficiently theyʼll run (saving you on your energy bill) and the longer theyʼll last (saving you on replacement costs).
<!--more-->
**32. Cancel unused club memberships.**

Are you paying dues at a club that you never use? Like, for instance, a gym membership or a country club membership? Cancel these club memberships, even if you think you might use them again someday - you can always renew the membership at a later date if it turns out that you actually do miss it.

**33. When shopping for standard items (clothes, sports equipment, older games,etc.), start by shopping used.**

Quite often, you can find the exact item you want with a bit of clever shopping at used equipment stores, used game stores, consignment shops, and so on. Just make these shops a part of your normal routine - go there first when looking for potential items and you will save money.

**34. Keep your hands clean.**

This oneʼs simple - just wash your hands thoroughly each [time you use the bathroom or handle raw foods \[56\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/03/23/five-minute-finances-15-wash-your-hands/). Youʼll keep yourself from acquiring all kinds of viruses and bacteria, saving you on medical bills and medicine costs and lost productivity. Thatʼs not to say you shouldnʼt explore the world and get your hands dirty sometimes - thatʼs good for you, too - but basic sanitation does help keep the medical bills away.

**35. Remove your credit card numbers from your online accounts.**

Itʼs easy to spend online when you have your card information stored in an account - just click and buy. The best way to break this habit is to simply delete your card from the account. That way, when youʼre tempted to spend, youʼll be forced to spend the time to dig out your card - and really think about why youʼre spending this money.
<amp-img width="150" height="139" layout="intrinsic" src="/assets/images/000011.png"></amp-img>

**36. Give a gift of a service instead of an item.**

For new parents, give an evening of babysitting as a gift. If you know pet owners, offer to take care of their pets when they travel. Offer up some lawn care as a gift to a new homeowner. These are always spectacular gifts for anyone - I know that, as a parent of a toddler and an infant, I love receiving a babysitting gift, probably more than any "stuff" I might receive.

**37. Do holiday shopping right after the holidays.**

Most people use this technique for [Christmas, but it works for every holiday \[57\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/09/21/the-one-hour-project-go-christmas-shopping-at-sale-time/). Wait until about two days after a holiday, then go out shopping for items you need that are themed for that day. Get a Motherʼs Day card for next year the day after Motherʼs Day. Get Easter egg decorating kits the day after Easter. Get wrapping paper and cards and such the day after Christmas. The discounts are tremendous, and you can just put this stuff in the closet until next year, saving you a bundle.

**38. Join up with a volunteer program.**

Itʼs a great way to meet new people, get some exercise, and involve yourself in a positive project that can lift your spirit. It also comes without a cost to you and can provide a lot of entertainment and a fulfilling day when youʼre in the right mindset. Iʼve come to spend more and more of my time volunteering, serving on various committees and groups in the community - and itʼs the best thing Iʼve ever done.

**39. Reevaluate the stuff in the rooms in your house.**

Go into a room and go through every single item in it. Do you really need that item? Are you happy that itʼs there, or would you be just fine if it were not? If you can find stuff to get rid of, get rid of it - it just creates clutter and it might have some value to others. You also improve the perceived value of your house - and youʼre likely to get a lot of cleaning done in the process. Itʼs a frugal win-win-win.

**40. Try generic brands of items you buy regularly.**

Instead of just picking up the ordinary brand of an item you buy, try out the store brand or generic version of the item. Likely, youʼll save a few cents now, but youʼll also likely discover that the store brand is just as good as the name brand - the only difference between the two, often, is the marketing. Once youʼre on board the generic train, youʼll find your regular grocery bill getting smaller and smaller.

**41. Prepare some meals at home.**

Get an accessible and easy-to-use cookbook (my favorite "beginner" cookbook is Mark Bittmanʼs excellent *How to Cook Everything*) and try making some of the dishes inside. Youʼll find that cooking at home is much easier than you think - and way cheaper and healthier than take-out or dining out. Even better, [you can easily prepare meals in advance \[58\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2008/01/17/preparing-your-own-skillet-meals-in-advance/)[- even handy fast food type meals \[59\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2006/12/11/battling-the-convenience-and-costs-of-fast-food/).

**42. Switch to term life insurance.**

Repeat after me: insurance is not an investment [\[60\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/06/07/interesting-insights-into-life-insurance-from-an-actuary-how-he-would-buy-life-insurance/). Switch to term insurance instead and use that difference in cost to get yourself out of debt and start building some wealth. Universal and whole policies are much more expensive and offer a sub par investment opportunity (unless youʼre buying for a child) - youʼre much better off getting yourself free of a debt burden than spending extra on such things.

**43. Go for reliability and fuel efficiency when buying a car.**

A reliable and fuel [efficient car will save you thousands over the long haul \[60\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2009/03/21/the-hows-and-whys-of-our-car-purchase-a-2009-toyota-prius/). Letʼs say you drive a vehicle for 80,000 miles. If you choose a 25 miles per gallon car over a 15 miles per gallon car, you save 2,133 gallons of gas. At \$3 a gallon, thatʼs \$6,400 in savings right there. Reliability can pay the same dividends. Do the research - it will pay off for you.

**44. Donʼt go to stores or shopping centers for entertainment.**

Doing so is just an encouragement to spend money you donʼt really have on stuff you donʼt really need. Instead, find other places to entertain yourself - the park, the basketball court, a museum, a friendʼs house, or even in your own home. Donʼt substitute shopping for entertainment and youʼll be way better off.

**45. Master the ten second rule**. Whenever you pick up an item in order to add it to your cart or to take it to the checkout, stop for ten seconds and ask yourself why youʼre [buying it and whether you actually need it or not \[61\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2006/11/21/the-ten-second-rule/). If you canʼt find a good answer, put the item back. This keeps me from making impulse buys on a regular basis.

**46. Rent out unused space in your home.**

Do you have an extra bedroom thatʼs not being used? Rent it out. In our home, we could, if times were tough, rent out our entire basement - it has a "living room," a bedroom, and a bathroom and has a stairwell right by the kitchen. If we found the right person, this would bring in a lot of extra money.

**47. Create a visual reminder of your debt.**

Basically, just make a giant progress bar [that starts with the amount of debt you have and ends with zero \[62\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/09/12/the-one-hour-project-create-a-visual-debt-reminder/). Each time you pay down a little bit, fill in a little more of that progress bar. Keep this reminder in a place where youʼll see it often, and keep filling it in regularly. It keeps your eyes on the prize and leads you straight to debt freedom.

**48. Get rid of unread magazine subscriptions.**

Do you have a pile of unread magazines sitting around your house? Likely, itʼs the result of a subscription that youʼre not reading. Not only should you not renew that magazine, you should give their subscription department a call and try to cancel for a refund - sometimes, theyʼll give you the prorated amount back. Iʼve had to cull my subscriptions in the past, but Iʼve never regretted it.

**49. Eat breakfast.**

Eating a healthy breakfast fills you up with energy for the day and also decreases your desire to eat a big lunch in the middle of the day. Not only that, breakfast can be very healthy, quick, and inexpensive [\[63\].](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/08/21/tackling-breakfast-healthy-inexpensive-and-easy-meals-to-get-me-started-in-the-morning/)A bowl of oatmeal in the morning is often the one thing that keeps me from running out to eat an expensive lunch later in the day - and it keeps me peppy and full of energy for the entire morning instead of in a coffee-laced daze.

**50. Swap babysitting with neighbors.**

We live in a neighborhood with an army of young children out and about. Because of that, there are a lot of parents out there who are quite willing to swap babysitting nights with us, saving you the money of hiring one for an evening out. A few families even take this to incredible extremes. Try to find another set of parents or two that you trust, and swap nights of babysitting with them. That way, youʼll get occasional evenings free without the cost of a babysitter, saving you some scratch.

**51. Donʼt fear leftovers - instead, jazz them up.**

Many people dread eating leftovers - theyʼre just inferior rehashes of regular meals, not exactly enjoyable to the discerning palate. However, thereʼs nothing cheaper than eating leftovers and with a few great [techniques for making leftovers tasty \[64\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/01/04/i-hate-leftovers-fighting-the-battle-with-recycled-food-and-winning/), you can often end up with something <amp-img width="160" height="240" layout="intrinsic" src="/assets/images/000012.png"></amp-img> surprising and quite delicious on the other end. My favorite technique? Chaining - using the leftovers as a basis for an all-new dish.

**52. Go through your clothes - all of them.**

If you have a regular urge to buy clothes, go through everything that you have and see what you might find. Take the clothes at the back of the closet and bring them to the front and suddenly your wardrobe will feel completely different. Take the clothes buried in your dresser and pull them to the top. Youʼll feel like a brand new person who doesnʼt need to spend money on clothes right now.

**53. Brown bag your lunch.**

Instead of going out to eat at work, take your own lunch. Lots of people think that this means "nasty lunch," but it doesnʼt. With some thoughtful preparation and just a few [minutes of time \[65\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/03/09/five-minute-finances-9-make-a-sandwich-or-something-else/), you can create something quite enjoyable for your brown bag lunch - and save a fistful of cash each day, too.

**54. Learn how to dress minimally.**

Buy clothes that mix and match well and youʼll not need nearly as many clothes. If you have five pants, seven shirts, and seven ties that all go together, you have almost an endless wardrobe right there just by mixing and matching. This is exactly what I do in Day 57: Brown Baggin It. Photo by Brymo order to minimize clothes buying and still look professional - I just mix and remix what I wear by using utilitarian clothes options to begin with.

**55. Ask for help and encouragement from your inner circle**. Sit down and talk to the people you love and care about the most and ask them for help. Tell them that youʼre trying to trim your spending and youʼd love it if they offered any suggestions and support they might have - and pay attention to what they tell you. They might have some personal insights for your situation that will really help.
<amp-img width="240" height="180" layout="intrinsic" src="/assets/images/000013.png"></amp-img>

**56. If somethingʼs broken, give a fair shot at repairing it yourself before replacingit or calling a repairman.**

Get a handymanʼs book or advice from the internet and give it a shot yourself. Iʼve fixed clocks, air conditioners, and VCRs by doing this before, saving significant cash by saving on a replacement or on a repair person.

**57. Keep an idea notebook in your pocket.**

Iʼve wasted countless amounts of time and money simply because Iʼve forgotten things in my head. Instead of relying on my memory, I keep a small notebook with me to jot down ideas and things I need to [remember \[66\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/09/28/the-one-hour-project-keep-an-idea-notebook-in-your-pocket/), then I check it regularly throughout the day. This keeps me from forgetting to pick up milk and having to backtrack ten miles, for starters.

**58. Invest in a deep freezer.**

A deep freezer, after the initial investment, is a great [bargain \[67\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/07/16/is-a-deep-freezer-worth-it/). You can use it to store all sorts of bulk foods, which enables you to pay less per pound of it at the market. Even better, you can store lots of meals prepared in advance, enabling you to just go home and pop something homemade (and cheap) in the oven.

**59. Look for a cheaper place to live.**

The cost of living in Iowa is [surprisingly low \[68\]](http://www.thesimpledollar.com/2007/06/21/you-dont-need-six-figures-the-financial-realities-of-living-in-iowa/), enough so that Iʼm quite happy to give up the cultural opportunities of other places to enjoy Iowa all year around. When I want to enjoy the cultural opportunities of another place, Iʼll travel there - after all, I can afford it. Take a serious look about moving to a less expensive area \- if you can find work there, then a 0112 Iowa Sunset. Photo by iowa\_spirit\_walker move can definitely put you in better financial shape.

**60. Check out what your townʼs parks and recreation board has to offer**. My town has several wonderful parks, free basketball and tennis courts, free disc golf, trails, and lots of other stuff just there waiting to be used. You can go have fun for hours out in the wonderful outdoors, playing sports, hiking on trails, or trying other activities - and itʼs all there for free. All you have to do is discover it.